[DOC] Add tail sampling doc (#4766)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/configuration/grafana-alloy/tail-sampling/enable-tail-sampling.md

---
title: Enable tail-based sampling
menuTitle: Enable tail sampling
description: Use tail-based sampling to optimize sampling decisions.
---

> # Enable tail-based sampling

Author: ```suggestion
# Enable tail sampling
```

> Tempo provides an inexpensive solution that aims to reduce the amount of tail-based sampling required.
> However, sometimes constraints make a lower sampling percentage necessary or desirable,
> such as runtime or egress traffic related costs.
> Probabilistic sampling strategies are easy to implement,
> but also run the risk of discarding relevant data that you'll later want.
> 
> Tail-based sampling works with Grafana Alloy.
> Alloy configuration files are written in [Alloy configuration syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/concepts/configuration-syntax/).

Author: ```suggestion
You can use tail sampling to use a lower sampling percentage when necessary or desirable,
such as runtime or egress traffic related costs.
Probabilistic sampling strategies are easy to implement,
but also run the risk of discarding relevant data that you'll later want.

Tail sampling works with Grafana Alloy.
Alloy configuration files are written in [Alloy configuration syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/concepts/configuration-syntax/).
```

> ## Configure tail-based sampling

Author: ```suggestion
## Configure tail sampling
```

> To start using tail-based sampling, define a sampling policy in your configuration file.

Author: ```suggestion
To start using tail sampling, define a sampling policy in your configuration file.
```

If you're using a multi-instance deployment of Alloy,
add load balancing and specify the resolving mechanism to find other Alloy instances in the setup.

To see all the available configuration options for load balancing, refer to the [Alloy component reference](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol.exporter.loadbalancing/).

### Example for Alloy

> Alloy uses the [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling component`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/) for tail-based sampling.

Author: ```suggestion
Alloy uses the [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling component`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/) for tail sampling.
```

---
title: Enable tail-based sampling

> menuTItle: Enable tail-based sampling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
menuTitle: Enable tail-based sampling
```

> description: Use tail-based sampling to optimize sampling decisions.

Reviewer: We can also add more description here. I'll see if I can convert this into a Vale rule.

Author: ```suggestion
description: Configure tail sampling with Tempo and Grafana Alloy to optimize sampling decisions.
```

> weight:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---

# Enable tail-based sampling

Tempo provides an inexpensive solution that aims to reduce the amount of tail-based sampling required.
However, sometimes constraints make a lower sampling percentage necessary or desirable,
such as runtime or egress traffic related costs.
Probabilistic sampling strategies are easy to implement,
but also run the risk of discarding relevant data that you'll later want.

Tail-based sampling works with Grafana Alloy.

> Alloy configuration files are written in [Alloy configuration syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/concepts/configuration-syntax/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alloy configuration files are written in [Alloy configuration syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/concepts/configuration-syntax/).
```

Reviewer 2: I see these docs here: https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/grafana-alloy/tail-based-sampling/ - I am just wondering about the strategy of pulling it out or duplicating it in tempo docs?

## Configure tail-based sampling

To start using tail-based sampling, define a sampling policy in your configuration file.

If you're using a multi-instance deployment of Alloy,
add load balancing and specify the resolving mechanism to find other Alloy instances in the setup.

> To see all the available configuration options for load balancing, refer to the [Alloy component reference](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol.exporter.loadbalancing/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see all the available configuration options for load balancing, refer to the [Alloy component reference](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol.exporter.loadbalancing/).
```

### Example for Alloy

> Alloy uses the [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling component`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/) for tail-based sampling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alloy uses the [`otelcol.processor.tail_sampling component`](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol.processor.tail_sampling/) for tail-based sampling.
```
